Blog: Draft 2.8 Release (#519)
PCSX2/pcsx2-net-www: blog/2026/pcsx2-2.8/index.mdx

Video Encoders:

- Hardware Encoders:
  - [AMD AMF/VCE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_Coding_Engine)
  - [Intel QSV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_Quick_Sync_Video)
  - [Nvidia NVENC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NVENC)
  - [Media Foundations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_Foundation)
  - [Vulkan Video](https://www.khronos.org/blog/an-introduction-to-vulkan-video)

- Software Encoders:
  - [libx264 (H264)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/encoders/x264)
  - [libsvtav1 (AV1)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/video/AV1)
  - [ffv1 (FFmpeg's own codec)](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/Encode/FFV1)
  - [qtrle (Apple QT RLE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QuickTime_Animation)

Audio Encoders:

- [AAC (Advanced Audio Coding)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/AAC)
- [Opus](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/Opus)
- [FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)](https://xiph.org/flac/)
- [`pcm_s16le` & `pcm_s16be` (WAV)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WAV)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13974">
  ### USB: Implement EyeToy camera support on macOS
</PCSX2PRLink>

SternXD worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. With this, all 3 OSes now have full EyeToy camera support!

:::tip

> The [EyeToy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EyeToy) was a USB camera accessory for the PS2. Supported games used early forms of [computer vision](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_vision) or solely used it for taking photos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [EyeToy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EyeToy) was a USB camera accessory for the PS2. Supported games used early forms of [computer vision](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_vision) or solely used it for taking photos.
```

/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14843">
  ### GS/HW: Fix some target detection and format issues.
</PCSX2PRLink>

Fixes problems with target overlap of a single pixel and looking into the future to get the correct frame format on shuffles.

Single pixel overlap was happening on Steambot as it was drawing right on the edge of the target, then blending in the Z buffer, which is of course not good.

Also fixed an issue where when there is a texture shuffle it checks if the target is used in the next draw as a texture, but didn't consider if it was also a shuffle of a different type, so that is now corrected.

SteamBot Chronicles:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot_After.webp").default}
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot2_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13841">
  ### GS/HW: Adjust depth copies when doing Texture Cache moves
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Previously, depth textures being moved in the texture cache would be done via GPU copy operations. Now they are done with shader copy/blit operations. Extra care was given to Direct3D 11 which does not support partial copies and Direct3D 12 with it's inconsistent driver-level support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, depth textures being moved in the texture cache would be done via GPU copy operations. Now they are done with shader copy/blit operations. Extra care was given to Direct3D 11, which does not support partial copies, and Direct3D 12 with its inconsistent driver-level support.
```

/>
<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14597/EnergyAirforce_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14597/EnergyAirforce_After.webp").default}
/>

The Sims - Bustin Out:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/SimsBustinOut_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/SimsBustinOut_After.webp").default}
/>

The Sims 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/Sims2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/Sims2_After.webp").default}
/>

FIFA 2009:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/FIFA2009_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/FIFA2009_After.webp").default}
/>

Persona 4:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14597/Persona4_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14597/Persona4_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14301,14567,14595,14550">
  ### GS/HW: Framebuffer switching optimizations
</PCSX2PRLink>

Avoiding framebuffer switching has been further optimized. This allows us to reuse the old framebuffer attachments which provides a FPS boost.

> To make it a bit simpler, the less re-binding/re-attachments are done the better. However, great care is needed because if done improperly it can cause issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avoiding framebuffer switching has been further optimized. This allows us to reuse the old framebuffer attachments, which provides an FPS boost.

To make it a bit simpler, the less re-binding/re-attaching is done, the better. However, great care is needed because if done improperly it can cause issues.
```

  }
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14382">
  ### GS/HW: Correct buffered rect size of corrected EE->GS transfers
</PCSX2PRLink>

Fixes an issue when merging sequential EE-to-GS transfers targeting the same memory address, ensuring transfer bounding rectangles are properly combined rather than overwritten.

Previously, subsequent transfers to identical addresses were overwriting the stored bounding box instead of expanding it. When this rectangle was later used to determine texture target dimensions, incorrect sizes were calculated. Properly uniting these transfer regions fixes missing graphics on the loading screen in _Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction_.

Mercenaries:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14382/Mercenaries_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14382/Mercenaries_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14419">
  ### GS/TC: Update dirty target linked to source when dirty overlaps the read
</PCSX2PRLink>

Properly update render targets when linked to an existing source that is in-use (dirty) and overlaps the requested read address in the cache.

> If an source texture was updated via EE-to-GS upload (and still in use by a target) - there were cases where the texture cache was not updated properly, causing old data to be used. Updating the dirty linked target fixes corrupted arrow sprites in _Pump It Up: Exceed_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a source texture was updated via EE-to-GS upload (and still in use by a target), there were cases where the texture cache was not updated properly, causing old data to be used. Updating the dirty linked target fixes corrupted arrow sprites in _Pump It Up: Exceed_.
```

---
draft: false
title: PCSX2 2.8.0 is now out!
tags:
  - devblog
date: 2026-08-22
description: PCSX2 2.8 Release Post
hide_table_of_contents: false
titleImage: /img/2-0-banner.webp
image: /img/2-0-banner.webp
authors:
  - kamfretoz
  - lightningterror
  - airgamer
  - pandubz
  - jordan
  - link
  - stern
  - govanify
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import { BsWindows, BsApple, BsLightningChargeFill } from "react-icons/bs";
import { FaLinux } from "react-icons/fa";
import { FaComputer, FaScaleBalanced } from "react-icons/fa6";
import { GiTurtleShell } from "react-icons/gi";

Nearly six months after the release of PCSX2 2.6.0 and two years after the big milestone release of 2.0.0, we are excited to unveil PCSX2 2.8.0! We're even more excited to showcase the things that we have been working on.

To start with a teaser, we have some serious performance gains to talk about with this release, seen here with Need for Speed: Carbon!

> picture:

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need `picture:` here.

<Image src={require("./img/benches/main.webp").default} />

Now let's jump into this release's major talking points!

<!--truncate-->

:::tip

> For a full list of changes and commits, you may check out our milestone page on GitHub [here](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/milestone/9?closed=1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a full list of changes, you can check out our milestone page on GitHub [here](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/milestone/9?closed=1).
```

:::

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">The System Requirements Update</TextGradient>

> We have updated our system requirements again to keep up with several improvements to the core and graphics pipeline which demand more power than our old requirements specified.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't add emphasis to 'again'

```suggestion
We have updated our system requirements to reflect several improvements to the core and graphics pipelines that require more powerful hardware than our previous requirements recommended.
```

:::caution[Caution]
See below for our new requirements:

> <table aria-label="2-by-3 table for example CPUs and GPUs from major manufacturers">

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to stop the GPU row background from being accented?

Author: I dont think so, the accent is part of the table is the same on the other places as well. its the same alternating row colors stuff that Qt does too
<img width="1202" height="902" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8010e734-7c59-4e06-b9c1-3013792c4350" />

          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 1500X</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i7-8700K</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 3600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i5-12400</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 5600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td scope="row">GPU</td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example minimum GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 750 Ti</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 460</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A380</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 1650</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 5600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce RTX 4060 8GB</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 6600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc B580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">Installer Visual Overhaul</TextGradient>

> The installer has received quiet a facelift and modernizations, now it looks more sleek and comes with dark mode support!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The installer has received quite a facelift. It now looks more sleek and comes with dark mode support.
```

---
draft: false
title: PCSX2 2.8.0 is now out!
tags:
  - devblog
date: 2026-08-22
description: PCSX2 2.8 Release Post
hide_table_of_contents: false
titleImage: /img/2-0-banner.webp
image: /img/2-0-banner.webp
authors:
  - kamfretoz
  - lightningterror
  - airgamer
  - pandubz
  - jordan
  - link
  - stern

>   - govanify

Reviewer 2: at this point plz add me as an author

          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 3600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i5-12400</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 5600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td scope="row">GPU</td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example minimum GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 750 Ti</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 460</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A380</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 1650</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 5600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce RTX 4060 8GB</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 6600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc B580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">Installer Visual Overhaul</TextGradient>

The installer has received quiet a facelift and modernizations, now it looks more sleek and comes with dark mode support!
It also has received some Quality of Life Improvements such as:

> - In Portable mode, the install location will now default to the root of the drive that the installer is being run from. (Of course you can still change it!)

Reviewer 2: A default implies it's an option, hence you can change it.

```suggestion
- In Portable mode, the install location will now default to the root of the drive that the installer is being run from.
```

> - In Portable mode, it will no longer create Uninstaller entry on the start menu.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In Portable mode, it will no longer create an uninstaller entry in the start menu.
```

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/Installer_Light.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/Installer_Dark.webp").default}
/>

<Image src={require("./img/Installer_Progress.webp").default} />

<Image src={require("./img/Installer_Complete.webp").default} />

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">New Features</TextGradient>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TheLastRar" prNums="14065">
  ### Deps: Bundle FFmpeg on Windows
</PCSX2PRLink>

FFmpeg is now bundled together with the Windows build of PCSX2. It's no longer necessary for you to download FFmpeg separately before you use the built-in Video Capture!

> We've also hand-picked the most popular codecs around. Previously we included everything that FFmpeg offers, but this was simply too much wasted space on codecs that are not frequently used, if at all. The reduced set of codecs should still provide you all the modern, efficient options you need without taking up much extra space.

Reviewer 2: Tense fixes. Tightened it up.
```suggestion
We've also hand-picked the most popular codecs. Previously, we included everything that FFmpeg offered, but this was too much wasted space on codecs that were rarely, if ever, used . The reduced set of codecs should still provide you with all the modern, efficient options you need without taking up much extra space.
```

Video Encoders:

> - Hardware Encoders:

Reviewer 2: If we hyperlink for software encoders, is there anything we can link for these hardware ones?

Author: I'll link the respecting Wiki entries for each HW encoders

  - AMD AMF (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Intel QSV (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Nvidia NVENC (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Media Foundations (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Vulkan Video (H264, H265, AV1)

- Software Encoders:
  - [libx264 (H264)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/encoders/x264)
  - [libsvtav1 (AV1)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/video/AV1)
  - [ffv1 (FFmpeg's own codec)](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/Encode/FFV1)
  - [qtrle (Apple QT RLE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QuickTime_Animation)

Audio Encoders:

- [AAC (Advanced Audio Coding)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/AAC)
- [Opus](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/Opus)
- [FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)](https://xiph.org/flac/)
- [`pcm_s16le` & `pcm_s16be` (WAV)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WAV)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13974">
  ### USB: Implement EyeToy camera support on macOS
</PCSX2PRLink>

> SternXD worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. With this, all 3 OSes now have full EyeToy camera support!

Reviewer 2: A lot of people might not know what an EyeToy is.
It may be valuable to add one of the 'tip' banners that gives a little blurb.

something like "The EyeToy was a USB camera accessory for the PS2. Supported games used early forms of [computer vision](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_vision) or solely used it for taking photos"

</PCSX2PRLink>

Florin9doi has worked on adding additional Train Mascon and Master Controller support to the existing Train controller feature.

Alongside that, they have also added support for Olympus Camera and Olympus Turbo MO miniEX IV (MO644U2S, MO133U2S) Storage Devices.

<Image src={require("./img/Train_Controller.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="14127">
  ### Qt/FullscreenUI/ImGui: On-Screen Display Customizations
</PCSX2PRLink>

This grants the ability to customize the look of the On-Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We also gave the On-Screen Display its own dedicated settings within PCSX2.

The frame time graph now has more detailed measurements as well!

:::tip
Use the monospace variant of your desired font family for the best readability.
:::

<Image src={require("./img/OSD.webp").default} />

<Image src={require("./img/OSD_Settings.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13926">
  ### Achievements: Various visual improvements to Achievements menu
</PCSX2PRLink>

The Achievements section has received some enhancements!

> - The collapsing headers have been replaced with a sidebar in the achievement menu for games with multiple subsets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The collapsing headers have been replaced with a sidebar in the achievements menu for games with multiple subsets.
```

- Added subset mastery notifications.
- When a subset is open, the header shows that subset’s title, stats, and progress bar.
- Missable, Win Condition, and Progression indicators are now shown as small badges next to the achievement title.

<Image src={require("./img/Cheevos.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13620">
  ### FullscreenUI: Implement cover download support
</PCSX2PRLink>

Just like its Qt counterpart, the Big Picture Mode interface now also gets its own cover downloader functionality! Now you no longer need to go to the Qt interface just to use the cover downloader. Convenience 💯

<Image src={require("./img/FSUI_Cover_Downloader.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14176">
  ### Qt: Add Icon Selection and Preview to the Shortcut Creator
</PCSX2PRLink>

The game shortcut creator now allows you to attach a custom icon to a shortcut as well when you're creating one. No more having to manually add them afterwards!

:::info

> Unlike other operating systems, Windows only allows icon files `(*.ico)` for shortcut icons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Windows only allows icon files `(*.ico)` for shortcut icons.
```

:::

<Image src={require("./img/Shortcut_Icon.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14308">
  ### Qt: Revamp the status bar
</PCSX2PRLink>

> The status bar has received quiet a number of quality of life improvements. You can now control the volume of the emulated virtual console directly from the main interface without going through the audio settings manually every time you want to adjust the volume. You can now also toggle the speed limit directly without using the hotkeys. Additionally, it shows you the host GPU usage, the renderer that the automatic renderer selection picked, and the currently active internal resolution multiplier.

Reviewer 2: Might be better as a list.

```suggestion
The status bar has received quite a number of quality of life improvements. You can now control the volume of the virtual console directly from the main interface without going to the audio settings manually. You can now toggle the speed limit directly without using the hotkeys. Additionally, it shows you the host GPU usage, the current renderer, and the currently active internal resolution multiplier.
```

<Image src={require("./img/Status_Bar.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14190,14191">
  ### Qt: Add a bunch of `Open XXX Folder` actions to Game List entries
</PCSX2PRLink>

> A few new options have been added to the Game List's context menu that allow you to open the folders of various PCSX2-related game data or resources right from within the application itself! You can access this by right-clicking a game entry on the Qt Game List.

Reviewer 2: Very long sentence. I don't think we need to specify Qt Game List?  Just Game List. Maybe other people disagree.

```suggestion
A few new options have been added to the Game List's context menu. These allow you to open the folders of various PCSX2-related game data or resources. You can access this by right-clicking a game entry in the Game List.
```

<Image src={require("./img/Open_Context_Menu.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14316">
  ### Qt: Add `-datapath` launch argument
</PCSX2PRLink>

> You can now override the default data folder location that PCSX2 uses with your own custom path, instead of being stuck with the default locations or portable mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now override the default data folder location that PCSX2 uses with your own custom path, instead of being stuck with the default locations.
```

Since this feature is not used frequently, there have been a couple of unresolved bugs. One such bug was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the game apparently left the CRTC merging functionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.

This is Football 2003:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/CRTCMerging/TiF_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/CRTCMerging/TiF_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13875">
  ### GS/Texture Cache: Improve depth target lookup behaviour
</PCSX2PRLink>

> In games such as Pachi Para we were picking the wrong target from the available list, which resulted in a whole bunch of issues. This aims to correct the behaviour when the target expects to pick up a depth target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In games such as Pachi Para, we were picking the wrong target from the available list, which resulted in a whole bunch of issues. This aims to correct the behaviour when the target expects to pick up a depth target.
```

/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14843">
  ### GS/HW: Fix some target detection and format issues.
</PCSX2PRLink>

Fixes problems with target overlap of a single pixel and looking into the future to get the correct frame format on shuffles.

Single pixel overlap was happening on Steambot as it was drawing right on the edge of the target, then blending in the Z buffer, which is of course not good.

Also fixed an issue where when there is a texture shuffle it checks if the target is used in the next draw as a texture, but didn't consider if it was also a shuffle of a different type, so that is now corrected.

SteamBot Chronicles:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot_After.webp").default}
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot2_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13841">
  ### GS/HW: Adjust depth copies when doing Texture Cache moves
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Previously depth textures being moved in the texture cache would be done via GPU copy operations. Instead, shader copy/blit operations are now used. This ensures accuracy matches OpenGL and Vulkan, but avoids issues with Direct3D 11 which does not support partial copies, and Direct3D 12 having inconsistent driver-level support from GPU vendors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, depth textures being moved in the texture cache would be done via GPU copy operations. Now they are done with shader copy/blit operations. Extra care was given to Direct3D 11 which does not support partial copies and Direct3D 12 with it's inconsistent driver-level support.
```

- At this size using full copies should be faster.

Currently it is only used when texture barriers are disabled but can be used when Depth testing/Afail copies are implemented.

Next, multidraw framebuffer copies have been backported from Direct3D 11 to OpenGL in cases where texture barriers aren't supported, which may help some older drivers which lack support.

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14034">
  ### GS/HW: Enable non recursive sw blending on minimum level.
</PCSX2PRLink>

Since non-recursive blending is basically free and doesn't require a barrier/copy, we can just enable it on minimum level without any cost for better accuracy.

Sniper Elite:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SniperElite_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SniperElite_After.webp").default}
/>

Star Wars Battlefront 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SWBF2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SWBF2_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14603">
  ### GS/Direct3D11: Backport ds as rt from GL for depth feedback.
</PCSX2PRLink>

> With the addition of depth feedback for Accurate Alpha Test/AA1, Direct3D 11 became painfully slow when using said features. This is because GPU depth copies are much, much slower on Direct3D 11 compared to color copies. A solution was to treat the depth as color, which would require additional shader copies, and later on, where we'd need a copy as a barrier, we'd do a color copy where we'd usually do a depth copy, resulting in doubling the speed or more, even though technically we do even more copies with the addition of shader copies. This brings the speed closer to OpenGL without using ROV when using AAT/AA1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the addition of depth feedback for Accurate Alpha Test/AA1, Direct3D 11 became painfully slow when using said features. This is because GPU depth copies are much, much slower on Direct3D 11 compared to color copies. A solution was to treat the depth as color, which would require additional shader copies, and later on, where we'd need a copy as a barrier, we'd do a color copy where we'd usually do a depth copy. This results in doubling the speed or more, even though technically we do even more copies with the addition of shader copies. This brings the speed closer to OpenGL without using ROV when using AAT/AA1.
```

<Image src={require("./img/benches/14603/FFX.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/14603/BCV.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13794">
  ### GS/HW: Improve channel shuffle detection and use on 24bit sources
</PCSX2PRLink>

Improves lookup of sources when 24-bit targets are involved. Also merges single page targets into larger targets if they overlap.

> Channel shuffles specifically always just requested entire targets to have valid information when looking up the source, however in some cases like with MotoGP, the source of the shuffle is a 24-bit target, so there is no valid alpha, so the lookup was failing, causing the shuffle to completely fall over. This corrects that by pre-checking what channels the shuffle requires for the read.

Reviewer 2: You can remove the text above this I think.

```suggestion
Our [channel shuffle](https://pcsx2.net/blog/2016/channel-shuffle-effect/) emulation used to only look in our texture cache for textures with the full 32 bits valid. Since games like MotoGP shuffle use a 24 bit texture, we would never find a match (the top 8 bits were not valid). We now pre-check what bits the shuffle needs, and made our texture cache lookup a little smarter.
```

L.A. Rush:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13794/LARush_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13794/LARush_After.webp").default}
/>

MotoGP:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13794/MotoGP_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13794/MotoGP_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2,lightningterror,TJnotJT" prNums="14455">
  ### GS/HW: Improve texture hazard handling, shuffles + fix CSBW typo
</PCSX2PRLink>

Reduce hazard copies where they are not required and fix a typo in the SW renderer drop back.

> Hazard checks were only checking if the texture and target were pointing to the same place; they didn't actually check if it was reading and writing from the same place. If they aren't, then there's no need to create a hazard copy as the data won't change; this will cut down a bunch of copies (as seen below). Also fixed a typo in the rect calculation for readbacks in the Software renderer dropback (CSBW), whoops.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A "hazard" occurs when a game is both writing to and reading from the same texture in the same draw. Our checks were only checking if the texture and target were pointing to the same place. It didn't actually check if it was reading and writing the same texels. If not, then there's no need to create a separate (hazard) copy as the data won't change. This will cut down a bunch of copies (as seen below). Also fixed a typo in the rect calculation for readbacks in the Software renderer fallback (CSBW), whoops.
```

- Detective Conan (Menu Graphics Bug): Render Passes: -460 [471 => 11], Draw Calls: -376 [1,599 => 1,223], Copies: -376 [380 => 4], Barriers: -168 [176 => 8]
- Rayman 3: Hoodlum Havoc: Draw Calls: -6 [210 => 204], Copies: -6 [34 => 28], Render Passes: -5 [64 => 59]
- Disney's PK: Out of the Shadows: Draw Calls: -2 [85 => 83], Render Passes: -2 [23 => 21], Copies: -2 [9 => 7]
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13872">
  ### GS/TC: Allow creation of target during GS->GS transfer with offset
</PCSX2PRLink>

Allows the texture cache to create render targets during GS-to-GS transfers when an offset is used, provided the offset and widths match.

Previously, these transfers failed to match a target and triggered slow GPU-to-CPU readbacks. Handling them directly in the texture cache allows menus in _Dynasty Warriors 2_ to upscale properly, while giving _Time Crisis 3_ roughly a 30% speedup by avoiding readbacks.

<Image src={require("./img/benches/13872/DynastyWarriors2.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/13872/TimeCrisis3.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13701">

>   ### GS/HW: Improve inside target wrapping and clear draw behaviour

Reviewer 2: This description feels like a changelog more than an in depth post.

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14685">
  ### GS/TC: Only bilinear resize depth if downscaled
</PCSX2PRLink>

Makes sure depth target resizes use nearest-neighbor filtering unless the depth target is downscaled, in which case bilinear filtering is used.

Using bilinear filtering on a depth target that isn't scaling actually corrupts depth values, resulting in ugly rendering artifacts. Restricting bilinear filtering only to downscaled depth targets fixes broken foot shadows in _Kingdom Hearts_ and geometry glitches in _The Nightmare Before Christmas_.

Kingdom Hearts:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14685/KingdomHearts_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14685/KingdomHearts_After.webp").default}
/>

Nightmare Before Christmas:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14685/Nightmare_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14685/Nightmare_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14490">

>   ### GS/TC: Fix target combining, scale and valid areas

Reviewer 2: this needs an accessible description or it should be removed.

</PCSX2PRLink>

Fixes an upscaling bug in `CombineAlignedTargets` where resolution scale was mistakenly applied to normalized source coordinates, causing the wrong data to be copied.

The valid draw area is also now preserved when combining targets. Previously, if a target was resized right after being combined, the missing draw area caused the new data to get lost. Fixing this resolves broken lighting in _Area 51_ and misaligned blur effects in _Valkyrie Profile 2: Silmeria_.

Area 51:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14490/Area51_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14490/Area51_After.webp").default}
/>

Valkyrie Profile 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14490/VP2_1_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14490/VP2_1_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14492">
  ### GS/HW: Downscale target before 8bit conversion
</PCSX2PRLink>

Downscales selected render targets to native resolution with filtering before converting them to 8-bit paletted textures.

> The 8-bit conversion routine doesn't do a great job on upscaled targets, leading to noisy dithering and color artifacts. Downscaling the target with filtering first yields a much cleaner result for post-processing effects in _Valkyrie Profile 2: Silmeria_ and _Xenosaga Episode III_.

Reviewer 2: The reader doesn't know what the 8-bit routine is.
This needs an accessible description or it should be removed.

Valkyrie Profile 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14492/VP2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14492/VP2_After.webp").default}
/>

Xenosaga Episode 3:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14492/Xenosaga3_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14492/Xenosaga3_After.webp").default}
/>

> <PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13823">

Reviewer 2: remove this PR

  ### GS: Fix copy/paste typo in TextureMinMax calculation, clean up code
</PCSX2PRLink>

Fixes a typo in the `TextureMinMax` calculation where vertical (Y) coordinates were mistakenly used to determine if horizontal (X) texture coordinates were flipped.

This error caused texture clipping routines (primarily in the Software renderer) to clip the wrong side of flipped 2D textures and UI elements. Correcting this fixes clipped 2D elements across several titles, including the fare meter in _Crazy Taxi_ and character portraits in _The King of Fighters XI_.

Crazy Taxi:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13823/CrazyTaxi_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13823/CrazyTaxi_After.webp").default}
/>

The King of Fighters XI:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13823/KOFXI_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13823/KOFXI_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13839">
  ### GS/HW: Improve iRem CRC hack
</PCSX2PRLink>

Improves the Irem CRC fix to better handle depth-channel shuffle effects.

> Irem games like to use dirty tricks to split out and select individual channels from the depth buffer for post-processing. The previous CRC hack missed certain channel setups and applied scanmasks that broke things in PCSX2. Providing the correct channels and skipping problematic scanmasks restores proper lighting, sky colors, and water effects in _Raw Danger! (Zettai Zetsumei Toshi 2)_ and _PachiPara 12_.

Reviewer 2: This uses a lot of verbiage the reader may not understand.

I suggest something like "Our game-specific hack for Irem titles was missing some of the ways these games use depth-buffer channels for post-processing. Handling these additional cases restores proper lighting, sky colours, and water effects in _Raw Danger! (Zettai Zetsumei Toshi 2)_ and _PachiPara 12_."

Zettai Zetsumei Toshi 2 (Raw Danger):

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13839/RawDanger1_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13839/RawDanger1_After.webp").default}
/>

Pachi Para 12:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13839/PachiPara12_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13839/PachiPara12_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13837">
  ### GS/TC: Delete empty target after height adjust
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Deletes render targets that get reduced to zero height during preloading instead of leaving them in the texture cache.

Reviewer 2: delete me

> Preloading was adjusting the height of older targets in memory, leaving them with zero height. Subsequent draws were then mistakenly picking these empty targets as texture sources and failing to update from memory. Deleting empty targets fixes missing textures in _PachiPara 13_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a new texture is loaded into the texture cache (TC), some bookkeeping is required to ensure that older entries don’t overlap with it. Otherwise, the game could read stale data from an old entry. We call this process preloading.

For example, if a new texture overwrites the top half of an older texture, the TC shrinks the older entry and adjusts its starting address to cover only the remaining data.

Previously, preloading could shrink an older entry to a height of zero without deleting it. A subsequent draw could then mistakenly select that empty entry as its texture source, preventing the texture from being updated with the correct data from memory.

Deleting these zero-height entries fixes missing textures in PachiPara 13.
```

Breath of Fire - Dragon Quarter:

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/14546/BOF_DragonQuarter_Before.webp").default
  }
  after={
    require("./img/comparisons/14546/BOF_DragonQuarter_After.webp").default
  }
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14541">
  ### GS/TC: Add new HW Readback option to force full download
</PCSX2PRLink>

Adds a new Hardware Download Mode option, **Accurate (Force Full)**, under Advanced Graphics settings.

Some games issue multiple small, partial GPU-to-CPU readbacks per frame, which is much more cumbersome than doing a single consolidated readback. In games like _SSX_ and _Armored Core 3_, forcing one full readback can provide a noticeable performance boost.

<Image src={require("./img/AccurateForceFull_Option.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13791">
  ### GS: Disallow flipped GS->GS transfer when destination overwrites source
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Disallows GS local-to-local transfers from reversing copy directions when the destination area overlaps and overwrites source data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GS local-to-local transfers are essentially memory copies within VRAM. Games can reverse the horizontal or vertical copy direction, but when the source and destination overlap, this can cause PCSX2 to overwrite source data before it has been read.

Original hardware avoids this problem with its GS page cache. Because PCSX2 performs these transfers without a cache, it now overrides unsafe reversed copies with a forward copy. This fixes heavily corrupted lighting and textures in _Armored Core 2_.
```

  }
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14382">
  ### GS/HW: Correct buffered rect size of corrected EE->GS transfers
</PCSX2PRLink>

Fixes an issue when merging sequential EE-to-GS transfers targeting the same memory address, ensuring transfer bounding rectangles are properly combined rather than overwritten.

Previously, subsequent transfers to identical addresses were overwriting the stored bounding box instead of expanding it. When this rectangle was later used to determine texture target dimensions, incorrect sizes were calculated. Properly uniting these transfer regions fixes missing graphics on the loading screen in _Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction_.

Mercenaries:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14382/Mercenaries_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14382/Mercenaries_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14419">
  ### GS/TC: Update dirty target linked to source when dirty overlaps the read
</PCSX2PRLink>

Updates render targets linked to an existing texture source when the target is dirty and overlaps the requested read.

> If a texture source was already linked to a target that later received new data through an EE-to-GS upload, the texture cache wasn't updating that target, causing old data to be used. Updating the dirty linked target fixes corrupted arrow sprites in _Pump It Up: Exceed_.

Reviewer 2: Needs a more accessible description or just remove it.

Pump It Up - Exceed:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14419/PumpItUp_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14419/PumpItUp_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14604">
  ### GS/TC: Check valid area overlap on exact match Tex is RT
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Checks that the valid drawn area overlaps the requested read area when an exact target match is found.

Reviewer 2: borderline: Needs a more accessible description or just remove it.

If a target was drawn with an offset and a texture upload was done earlier in the target, matching purely by memory pointer caused the renderer to pick the target and sample uninitialized black pixels instead of triggering an upload. Checking that the rect overlaps the target's valid area fixes black geometry glitches in _Devil May Cry_.

Devil May Cry:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14604/DevilMayCry_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14604/DevilMayCry_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14409">
  ### GS/HW: Remove zero clear from GSUploadQueue, use transfer_type instead
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Refactors `GSUploadQueue` to use the transfer type for clears instead of a separate variable.

Reviewer 2: To a reader, `GSUploadQueue` doesn't mean anything. 
"Refactors the GS texture upload handling...."

The transfer type field was previously left uninitialized during zero-clears, causing undefined behavior depending on the build and memory state. Explicitly requiring the transfer type eliminates this redundant variable and fixes missing publisher logos during intro and loading screens in _Worms 3D_.

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13961">
  ### IPU: Reset dc dct precision on soft reset
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Resets DC DCT (Discrete Cosine Transform) decoding precision in the IPU (Image Processing Unit) during soft resets.

Reviewer 2: Add a note banner thing
"The Image Processing Input (IPU) is the PS2s MPEG decoder. Primarily used for FMVs. :nerd_face: :point_up: "

and then 
"When the game would send a reset command to the IPU, we were mistakenly not resetting some of the internal IPU state. In particular, the DCT (Discrete Cosine Transform) decoding precision."

Clearing this precision state on reset fixes severe screen flashing during FMV video playback in _Critical Velocity_.

> Leftover DCT precision state was persisting across soft resets, corrupting MPEG video decoding on subsequent playback. Clearing this precision state on reset fixes severe screen flashing during FMV video playback in _Critical Velocity_.

Reviewer 2: remove

          <li>AMD Radeon RX 6600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc B580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">New Features</TextGradient>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TheLastRar" prNums="14065">
  ### Deps: Bundle ffmpeg on Windows
</PCSX2PRLink>

FFmpeg are now bundled directly with the Windows version of PCSX2, it is no longer necessary for you to download FFmpeg separately before if you want to use the built-in Video Capture!

And we've also hand-picked the most popular codecs around (previously we included everything that FFmpeg offers but this comes at a cost of complexity and choice paralysis _to some extent_).

Video Encoders:

- AMD AMF (H264, H265, AV1)
- Intel QSV (H264, H265, AV1)
- Nvidia NVENC (H264, H265, AV1)
- MediaFoundations (H264, H265, AV1)
- Vulkan (H264, H265, AV1)
- libx264 (H264)
- libsvtav1 (AV1)
- ffv1 (FFmpeg's own codec)
- qtrle (Apple QT RLE)

Audio Encoders:

- AAC (Advanced Audio Coding)
- Opus
- FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)
- pcm_s16 (WAV)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13974">
  ### USB: Implement EyeToy camera support on macOS
</PCSX2PRLink>

> SternXD the macOS afficionado had worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. All 3 OS now gets to enjoy full EyeToy camera supports!

Reviewer 3: shouldn't it be 'All 3 OS now gets to enjoy full EyeToy camera support !"  , can someone double check this  , my grammer is bad on a good day

Reviewer: This probably would be better maybe

`SternXD worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. With this, all 3 OSes now have full EyeToy camera support!`

      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i7-8700K</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 3600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i5-12400</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 5600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td scope="row">GPU</td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example minimum GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 750 Ti</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 460</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A380</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 1650</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 5600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce RTX 4060 8GB</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 6600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc B580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">New Features</TextGradient>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TheLastRar" prNums="14065">
  ### Deps: Bundle FFmpeg on Windows
</PCSX2PRLink>

> FFmpeg are now bundled together with the Windows build of PCSX2, it is no longer necessary for you to download FFmpeg separately before if you want to use the built-in Video Capture!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
FFmpeg is now bundled together with the Windows build of PCSX2, it is no longer necessary for you to download FFmpeg separately before you want to use the built-in Video Capture!
```

And we've also hand-picked the most popular codecs around (previously we included everything that FFmpeg offers but this comes at a cost of complexity and choice paralysis _to some extent_).

Video Encoders:

- AMD AMF (H264, H265, AV1)
- Intel QSV (H264, H265, AV1)
- Nvidia NVENC (H264, H265, AV1)

> - MediaFoundations (H264, H265, AV1)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Media Foundation (H264, H265, AV1)
```

- Vulkan (H264, H265, AV1)
- libx264 (H264)
- libsvtav1 (AV1)
- ffv1 (FFmpeg's own codec)
- qtrle (Apple QT RLE)

Audio Encoders:

- AAC (Advanced Audio Coding)
- Opus
- FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)
- pcm_s16 (WAV)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13974">
  ### USB: Implement EyeToy camera support on macOS
</PCSX2PRLink>

> SternXD the macOS afficionado had worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. All 3 OS now get to enjoy full EyeToy camera support!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
SternXD, the macOS afficionado, had worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. All 3 OS now get to enjoy full EyeToy camera support!
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="Florin9doi" prNums="13652,14328">
  ### USB: Train Mascon, Master Controller and Olympus Storage Devices support
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Florin9doi had worked on adding additional Train Mascon and Master Controller support to the existing Train controller feature alongside adding Olympus Camera and Olympus Turbo MO miniEX IV (MO644U2S, MO133U2S) Storage Device.

Reviewer 4: Maybe split the out the Olympus features into it's own sentence

<Image src={require("./img/Train_Controller.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="14127">
  ### Qt/FullscreenUI/ImGui: On-Screen Display Customizations
</PCSX2PRLink>

> This allows the ability to customize the looks of the On Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We have also gave the On Screen Display is own dedicated settings within PCSX2.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This allows the ability to customize the look of the On Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We have also gave the On Screen Display is own dedicated settings within PCSX2.
```

</PCSX2PRLink>

The Big Picture Mode interface can now be controlled using the analog instead of just using the D-Pad!

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14176">
  ### Qt: Add Icon Selection and Preview to the Shortcut Creator
</PCSX2PRLink>

The game shortcut creator now allows you also attach a custom icon to a shortcut as well when you're creating one, no more having to manually add them afterwards!

:::info
Do note that on Windows, only Icon files (`*.ico`) are accepted due to windows only supporting that format.
:::

<Image src={require("./img/Shortcut_Icon.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14190,14191">
  ### Qt: Add a bunch of `Open XXX Folder` for Game List Entries
</PCSX2PRLink>

A few new options has been added to the Game List's context menu that allows you to open the folders of various PCSX2 related data or resources right from within the applications itself! You can access it by right clicking a game entry on the Qt Game List.

<Image src={require("./img/Open_Context_Menu.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14316">
  ### Qt: Add `-datapath` launch argument
</PCSX2PRLink>

> You can now override the data folder location that PCSX2 uses to the one you wished to use instead of the default locations or the portable mode. Useful if you need to have an elaborate game customizations setup.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can now override the data folder location that PCSX2 uses to the one you wished to use instead of the default locations or portable mode. Useful if you need to have an elaborate game customizations setup.
```

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">Performance and Graphics Improvements</TextGradient>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13681,14439">
  ### GS/HW: Support for HW AA1 lines/triangles
</PCSX2PRLink>

AA1 is the PS2's name for antialiasing. Unlike MSAA, which rasterizes triangles at a higher resolution and then downsamples, the PS2's AA1 works by adding a semi-transparent border around each triangle as it's drawn. In order for the semi-transparent border to not block the triangles below, it doesn't write depth, even if the fully-opaque parts of the triangle do. Even so, that only prevents things from looking broken under AA1. For fully working antialiasing, PS2 games have to sort their triangles and draw back to front, like in the old depth-buffer-less days of the PS1.

> Because PC GPUs don't support writing depth for only some triangles in a draw, this was a software-renderer-only feature in PCSX2 for a long time, but TJ used PCSX2's newly-added software depth support to add support for these triangle borders. Due to the high cost of the software depth emulation, this is currently disabled by default, but can be enabled in the graphics settings which will allow it to activate on supported games.

Reviewer 4: We reference the newly-added software depth support, but we have yet to talk about it
Maybe we should move this `Support for HW AA1 lines/triangles` after `Depth feedback loops and accurate AFAIL.`
or reword this to `newly-added software depth support via depth feedback`?

Author: I've changed the order so depth feedback loops comes first

Comparison:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/GoW_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/GoW_After.webp").default}
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/Incredibles_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/Incredibles_After.webp").default}
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/AA1/JonnyMoseleydebug_Before.webp").default
  }
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/JonnyMoseleydebug_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13631">
  ### GS/HW: Depth feedback loops and accurate AFAIL.
</PCSX2PRLink>

The PS2's GS is known for being difficult to emulate due to how different it is from the PC hardware we use today. PCSX2 has long had options to choose between accuracy and speed for things like blending. The fast options pick a close but not identical setting for the PC hardware to approximate each setting of the GS. The accurate options move the operation from dedicated hardware to shaders, requiring large numbers of slow barriers to ensure the correct result.

> Until now, these options have all been only for the main color texture, but the GS also has mismatches with PC hardware in its handling of the depth texture. In particular, the alpha test, which allows games to set a cutoff value to discard pixels based on the alpha value in the texture, gives games the choice of whether to discard color, depth, or both. On the other hand, the only option for PC GPUs is to discard both[^Early_Fragment_Test].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Until now, these options have all been only for the main color texture, but the GS also has mismatches with PC hardware in its handling of the depth texture. In particular, the alpha test, which allows discarding pixels when the texture alpha value is below a set cutoff, gives games the choice of whether to discard color, depth, or both. On the other hand, the only option for PC GPUs is to discard both[^Early_Fragment_Test].
```

For games that choose the option to discard only color, PCSX2 can use the shader blend system to load the existing color from the render target and re-output that, but for depth, PCSX2 didn't support a fully accurate system. Instead, PCSX2 rendered every draw call twice. First, it would draw color only, without discarding based on the alpha test, then a second pass would draw depth only, discarding where needed. This means that if two overlapping triangles occurred in the same draw, it was possible for the wrong result to happen, since the pass that was drawing color didn't update depth and therefore wouldn't reject a further triangle drawn after a closer triangle.

> To fix this, TJ added a system similar to the color handling for depth, where we disable the dedicated hardware and instead do all processing in the shader. This means disabling the hardware depth test and emulating that as well, so that it doesn't interfere with our attempts to cancel depth update by re-emitting the existing depth value. Unfortunately, due to this being a niche usage of an already niche feataure, many of the APIs that did support this kind of shader feedback loop for color failed when we attempted to do the same with depth textures, handing our shaders outdated pixel values. In the end, only Vulkan, which has an extension made explicitly for this purpose, consistently worked, while the D3D12 and OpenGL default to copying the depth texture to a temporary color texture for the handling, then copying the result back to the original depth texture when done.[^DX11_Depth_Issue] [^FbFetch_Unsupported_GPU] [^Metal_FbFetch]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To fix this, TJ added a system similar to the color handling for depth, where we disable the dedicated hardware and instead do all processing in the shader. This means disabling the hardware depth test and emulating that as well, so that it doesn't interfere with our attempts to cancel depth update by re-emitting the existing depth value. Unfortunately, due to this being a niche usage of an already niche feataure, many of the APIs that did support this kind of shader feedback loop for color failed when we attempted to do the same with depth textures, handing our shaders outdated pixel values. In the end, only Vulkan, which has an extension made explicitly for this purpose, consistently worked, while the D3D12 and OpenGL renderers default to copying the depth texture to a temporary color texture for the handling, then copying the result back to the original depth texture when done.[^DX11_Depth_Issue] [^FbFetch_Unsupported_GPU] [^Metal_FbFetch]
```

Unfortunately, we had encountered a few issues with hardware anisotropic filtering GPUs;

- AMD drivers would ignore our attempts to enable Anisotropic filtering.
  LightningTerror had determined that providing a dummy mipmap layer had success on older GPUs, however, the workaround had only limited success on newer generations of AMD GPUs.

- DX12 did not allow anisotropic filtering and point filtering on the same texture.
  Point filtering is often used by games wanting a more pixel art style, instead of the smoothed sampling of other filtering methods.
  Due to limitations with the DX12 API, we had opted to ignore point filtering in favour of enabling anisotropic filtering.
  Unfortunately, this caused artifacts in Dragon Quest V where, without point filtering, some textures would have what would be invisible black pixels would instead bleed into visible parts of the texture (See [this issue](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/14077)).

Instead, by reimplementing anisotropic filtering in shader code, we can sidestep the issue of API limitations or driver inconsistencies.

> - Strictly speaking, anisotropic filtering improves sampling where one screen pixel covers more texture pixels in the x axis than the y axis (or vice versa). because of this, While oblique angled objects/floors are often the example used, anisotropic filtering also triggers on stretched textures.

Reviewer 4: Do we want this as a footnote instead?

Author: Done

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13943">
  ### GS/HW: Merge together adjacent tristrips in drawlist.
</PCSX2PRLink>

This Fixes a bug in tristrip detection that prevented triangle strips with 2 triangles from being detected. This brings massive gain in performance on some games.

<Image src={require("./img/benches/MergeTristriplist/GTA_SA.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="14140">
  ### GS: Fixes to CRTC merging
</PCSX2PRLink>

> One of the features of the PS2 is the "CRTC" merge circuits, which allow for some limited post-processing and compositing of images before it is output to the screen. Some of the functionality of there circuits, such as alpha blending two images together is usually done with the strandard rendering capabilities of the PS2. However, certain games make use of the CRTC merge cirtuits for things such as overlaying loading screen onto the main rendering.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One of the features of the PS2 is the "CRTC" merge circuits, which allow for some limited post-processing and compositing of images before it is output to the screen. Some of the functionality of these circuits, such as alpha blending two images together is usually done with the strandard rendering capabilities of the PS2. However, certain games make use of the CRTC merge cirtuits for things such as overlaying loading screen onto the main rendering.
```

> Since the feature is little used, there have been a couple unresolved bugs. One such was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the the game apparently left the CRTC merging funtionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since this feature is little used, there have been a couple unresolved bugs. One such was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the the game apparently left the CRTC merging funtionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.
```

---
draft: false
title: PCSX2 2.8.0 is now out!
tags:
  - devblog
date: 2026-08-20
description: PCSX2 2.8 Release Post
hide_table_of_contents: false
titleImage: /img/2-0-banner.webp
image: /img/2-0-banner.webp
authors:
  - kamfretoz
  - lightningterror
  - airgamer
  - pandubz
  - jordan
  - link
  - stern
  - govanify
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import { BsWindows, BsApple, BsLightningChargeFill } from "react-icons/bs";
import { FaLinux } from "react-icons/fa";
import { FaComputer, FaScaleBalanced } from "react-icons/fa6";
import { GiTurtleShell } from "react-icons/gi";

Nearly six months after the release of PCSX2 2.6.0 and two years after the big release of 2.0.0, we are excited to unveil PCSX2 2.8.0! We're even more excited to showcase the things that we have been working on.

> Before that, here is a small benchmarks to show how far we've come:

Reviewer 5: "Benchmark" should be singular, because it's one benchmark.

For cadence's sake, this also doesn't have to be a complete sentence. "Before that, a small benchmark to show how far we've come:" could flow more smoothly.

> Before that, here is a small benchmarks to show how far we've come:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Before that, here's a small benchmark to show how far we've come:
```

<Image src={require("./img/benches/main.webp").default} />

<!--truncate-->

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">The System Requirements Update</TextGradient>

As times change, so do we. Our priority as a project is always to improve, and unfortunately that means saying goodbye to some old tools and tech that we've come to love (or hate) over the years. This time is no different.

> :::caution[Caution]

Reviewer 5: I would recommend using the `:::info` tag here with a tag like `[Info – Hardware]` or `[Info – Requirements]`, where "Hardware" or "Requirements" can be replaced with whatever feels most natural. The "caution" tag seems a bit extreme and can feel pretty jarring right at the start of a blog post. The "info" tag naturally fits in with the PCSX2 color scheme too.

> The minimum system has now been bumped to reflect that changes.

Reviewer 5: I would call this the "suggested minimum system" to reflect what we call it on the reqs page.

Additionally, the correct grammar is "those changes".

> The minimum system has now been bumped to reflect that changes.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The minimum system requirements have now been updated to reflect those changes.
```

      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i7-8700K</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 3600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy CPUs">
          <li>Intel Core i5-12400</li>
          <li>AMD Ryzen 5 5600</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td scope="row">GPU</td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example minimum GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 750 Ti</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 460</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A380</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example moderate GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce GTX 1650</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 5600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc A580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul aria-label="Example heavy GPUs">
          <li>Nvidia GeForce RTX 4060 8GB</li>
          <li>AMD Radeon RX 6600 XT</li>
          <li>Intel Arc B580</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

## <TextGradient startColor="#7828C8" endColor="#FF4ECD">New Features</TextGradient>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TheLastRar" prNums="14065">
  ### Deps: Bundle FFmpeg on Windows
</PCSX2PRLink>

> FFmpeg is now bundled together with the Windows build of PCSX2, it is no longer necessary for you to download FFmpeg separately before you want to use the built-in Video Capture!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
FFmpeg is now bundled together with the Windows build of PCSX2. It's no longer necessary for you to download FFmpeg separately before you use the built-in Video Capture!
```

> And we've also hand-picked the most popular codecs around (previously we included everything that FFmpeg offers but this comes at a cost of complexity and choice paralysis _to some extent_).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We've also hand-picked the most popular codecs around. Previously we included everything that FFmpeg offers, but this comes at a cost of complexity and choice paralysis _to some extent_.
```

Video Encoders:

- Hardware Encoders:
  - AMD AMF (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Intel QSV (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Nvidia NVENC (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Media Foundations (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Vulkan Video (H264, H265, AV1)

- Software Encoders:
  - [libx264 (H264)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/encoders/x264)
  - [libsvtav1 (AV1)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/video/AV1)
  - [ffv1 (FFmpeg's own codec)](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/Encode/FFV1)
  - [qtrle (Apple QT RLE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QuickTime_Animation)

Audio Encoders:

- [AAC (Advanced Audio Coding)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/AAC)
- [Opus](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/Opus)
- [FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)](https://xiph.org/flac/)
- [`pcm_s16le` & `pcm_s16be` (WAV)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WAV)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13974">
  ### USB: Implement EyeToy camera support on macOS
</PCSX2PRLink>

> SternXD worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. With this, all 3 OSes now have full EyeToy camera support!

Reviewer 5: Small nitpick, but I might just expand this out to "all three operating systems". (In English, formal writing typically uses the full word for a number below ten. It's very weird and arbitrary. And 'operating systems' just makes it slightly clearer for that rare nontechnical audience.)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="Florin9doi" prNums="13652,14328">
  ### USB: Train Mascon, Master Controller and Olympus Storage Devices support
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Florin9doi had worked on adding additional Train Mascon and Master Controller support to the existing Train controller feature.

Reviewer 6: Train Mascon (What is this? Shorthand names are not great for a blog post) and Master Controller (Is this the same thing? If yes, why is it listed twice?)

Reviewer 4: They are different devices
[Train Mascon](https://traincontrollerdb.marcriera.cat/hardware/cotm02001/)
[Master Controller](https://traincontrollerdb.marcriera.cat/hardware/vok00105/)

> Alongside that they have added Olympus Camera and Olympus Turbo MO miniEX IV (MO644U2S, MO133U2S) Storage Device.

Reviewer 6: Is this one or two storage devices? If one, should be *the* Olympus Turbo... if two, should be storage device*s*

Author: Its Two

<Image src={require("./img/Train_Controller.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="14127">
  ### Qt/FullscreenUI/ImGui: On-Screen Display Customizations
</PCSX2PRLink>

> This allows the ability to customize the look of the On Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We have also gave the On Screen Display is own dedicated settings within PCSX2.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This grants the ability to customize the look of the On Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We also gave the On Screen Display its own dedicated settings within PCSX2.
```

> This allows the ability to customize the look of the On Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We have also gave the On Screen Display is own dedicated settings within PCSX2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows the ability to customize the look of the On-Screen Display, such as changing its fonts, location, scale, margin and more. We have also gave the On-Screen Display is own dedicated settings within PCSX2.
```

> The frametime graphs has now received a more detailed frametime measurements as well!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The frame time graph now has more detailed measurements as well!
```

:::tip

> Use the monospace variant of the font family you want to use for the best readability!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Use the monospace variant of your desired font family for the best readability.
```

:::

<Image src={require("./img/OSD.webp").default} />

<Image src={require("./img/OSD_Settings.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13926">
  ### Achievements: Various visual improvements to Achievements menu
</PCSX2PRLink>

> The Achievements section has received some facelift! The collapsing headers has been replaced with a sidebar in the achievement menu for games with multiple subsets. Added subset mastery notifications. When a subset is open, the header shows that subset’s title, stats, and progress bar. Missable, Win Condition, and Progression indicators are now shown as small badges next to the achievement title.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Achievements section has received some enhancements!
The collapsing headers have been replaced with a sidebar in the achievement menu for games with multiple subsets.
Added subset mastery notifications.
When a subset is open, the header shows that subset’s title, stats, and progress bar.
Missable, Win Condition, and Progression indicators are now shown as small badges next to the achievement title.
```

Not sure what markdown we'd use for an unordered (bullet point) list, but that seems ideal here.

Author: Done

<Image src={require("./img/Cheevos.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13620">
  ### FullscreenUI: Implement cover download support
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Just like its Qt's counterpart, the Big Picture Mode interface now also gets its own cover downloader functionality! now you no longer need to go to the Qt interface just to use the cover downloader. Convenience 💯

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Just like its Qt counterpart, the Big Picture Mode interface now also gets its own cover downloader functionality! Now you no longer need to go to the Qt interface just to use the cover downloader. Convenience 💯
```

<Image src={require("./img/FSUI_Cover_Downloader.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14176">
  ### Qt: Add Icon Selection and Preview to the Shortcut Creator
</PCSX2PRLink>

> The game shortcut creator now allows you also attach a custom icon to a shortcut as well when you're creating one, no more having to manually add them afterwards!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The game shortcut creator now allows you to attach a custom icon to a shortcut as well when you're creating one. No more having to manually add them afterwards!
```

:::info

> Do note that on Windows, only Icon files (`*.ico`) are accepted due to windows only supporting that format.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Note that on Windows, only icon files (`*.ico`) are accepted due to windows not supporting any other formats.
```

:::

<Image src={require("./img/Shortcut_Icon.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14308">
  ### Qt: Revamp the status bar
</PCSX2PRLink>

> The status bar has received quite a number of Quality of Life improvements. You can now control the volume of the emulated virtual console directly from the main interface without going through the audio settings manually everytime you want to adjust the volume. You can now also toggle the speed limit directly without using the hotkeys. It now also shows you the Host GPU Usage, the renderer that the automatic options picked, and the currently active internal resolution multiplier.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The status bar has received quite a number of quality of life improvements. You can now control the volume of the emulated virtual console directly from the main interface without going through the audio settings manually every time you want to adjust the volume. You can also now toggle the speed limit directly without using the hotkeys. Additionally, it shows you the host GPU usage, the renderer that the automatic renderer selection picked, and the currently active internal resolution multiplier.
```

<Image src={require("./img/Status_Bar.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14190,14191">
  ### Qt: Add a bunch of `Open XXX Folder` for Game List Entries
</PCSX2PRLink>

A few new options has been added to the Game List's context menu that allows you to open the folders of various PCSX2 related data or resources right from within the applications itself! You can access it by right clicking a game entry on the Qt Game List.

<Image src={require("./img/Open_Context_Menu.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14316">
  ### Qt: Add `-datapath` launch argument
</PCSX2PRLink>

> You can now override the data folder location that PCSX2 uses to the one you wished to use instead of the default locations or portable mode. Useful if you need to have an elaborate game customizations setup.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You can now override the default data folder location that PCSX2 uses with your own path, instead of being stuck with the default locations or portable mode.
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="jasaaved" prNums="14228">
  ### FullscreenUI: Add analog control to Big Picture Mode
</PCSX2PRLink>

> The Big Picture Mode interface can now be controlled using the analog instead of just using the D-Pad!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Big Picture Mode interface can now be controlled using analog sticks instead of just using the D-Pad!
```

Minna No Tennis:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/MNT_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/MNT_After.webp").default}
/>

Ratchet & Clank: Up Your Arsenal

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse_Before.webp")
      .default
  }
  after={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse_After.webp").default
  }
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse2_Before.webp")
      .default
  }
  after={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse2_After.webp")
      .default
  }
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13681,14439">
  ### GS/HW: Support for HW AA1 lines/triangles
</PCSX2PRLink>

> AA1 is the PS2's name for antialiasing. Unlike MSAA, which rasterizes triangles at a higher resolution and then downsamples, the PS2's AA1 works by adding a semi-transparent border around each triangle as it's drawn. In order for the semi-transparent border to not block the triangles below, it doesn't write depth, even if the fully-opaque parts of the triangle do. Even so, that only prevents things from looking broken under AA1. For fully working antialiasing, PS2 games have to sort their triangles and draw back to front, like in the old depth-buffer-less days of the PS1.

Reviewer 5: Might be worth making a dumb *Ace Attorney* reference here? x) I think you like AA too, after all.

As a robotic nitpick, "fully opaque" doesn't need a hyphen because "fully" is an adverb modifying opaque. (This is an insanely common mistake among English speakers that doesn't matter that much. You ironically wrote it more authentically than the "correct" version.)

> Because PC GPUs don't support writing depth for only some triangles in a draw, this was a software-renderer-only feature in PCSX2 for a long time, but TJ used PCSX2's newly-added software depth support to add support for these triangle borders. Due to the high cost of the software depth emulation, this is currently disabled by default, but can be enabled in the graphics settings which will allow it to activate on supported games.

Reviewer 5: I might write "this was exclusive to PCSX2's software renderer for a long time. TJ used PCSX2's newly added [blah blah]." Lastly, because you used a comma, it should be "but *it* can be enabled".

Simply put, this allows higher blending accuracy levels to incur less performance hits!

> Here is some benchmarks:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Here are some benchmarks:
```

- AMD drivers would ignore our attempts to enable Anisotropic filtering.
  LightningTerror had determined that providing a dummy mipmap layer had success on older GPUs, however, the workaround had only limited success on newer generations of AMD GPUs.

- DX12 did not allow anisotropic filtering and point filtering on the same texture.
  Point filtering is often used by games wanting a more pixel art style, instead of the smoothed sampling of other filtering methods.
  Due to limitations with the DX12 API, we had opted to ignore point filtering in favour of enabling anisotropic filtering.
  Unfortunately, this caused artifacts in Dragon Quest V where, without point filtering, some textures would have what would be invisible black pixels would instead bleed into visible parts of the texture (See [this issue](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/14077)).

Instead, by reimplementing anisotropic filtering in shader code, we can sidestep the issue of API limitations or driver inconsistencies.

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13943">
  ### GS/HW: Merge together adjacent tristrips in drawlist.
</PCSX2PRLink>

> This Fixes a bug in tristrip detection that prevented triangle strips with 2 triangles from being detected. This brings massive gain in performance on some games.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This fixes a bug in tristrip detection that prevented triangle strips with 2 triangles from being detected. This brings a massive performance gain on some games.
```

<Image src={require("./img/benches/MergeTristriplist/GTA_SA.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="14140">
  ### GS: Fixes to CRTC merging
</PCSX2PRLink>

One of the features of the PS2 is the "CRTC" merge circuits, which allow for some limited post-processing and compositing of images before it is output to the screen. Some of the functionality of these circuits, such as alpha blending two images together is usually done with the strandard rendering capabilities of the PS2. However, certain games make use of the CRTC merge cirtuits for things such as overlaying loading screen onto the main rendering.

> Since this feature is little used, there have been a couple unresolved bugs. One such was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the the game apparently left the CRTC merging funtionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Since this feature is not used frequently, there have been a couple unresolved bugs. One such was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the the game apparently left the CRTC merging funtionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.
```

Kenran Butousai:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13841/KenranBoutosai_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13841/KenranBoutosai_After.webp").default}
/>

Kunoichi:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13841/Kunoichi_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13841/Kunoichi_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13869">
  ### GS/Direct3D12: Don't end render passes on enhanced barriers
</PCSX2PRLink>

Following the addition of Enhanced Barriers it was discovered that we can cut down the number of render passes (attachment state changes), in some scenarios this provided further a nice boost when using enhanced barriers on D3D12.

<Image src={require("./img/benches/13869/NFS_MW.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/13869/RC3.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/13869/WRC4.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14059,14073,14597">
  ### GS/HW: Improve destination alpha testing handling
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Previously it was believed that resolving these issues would require ROV, however lightningterror discovered that handling can be improved without needing ROV.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Previously it was believed that resolving these issues would require ROV, however LightningTerror discovered that handling can be improved without needing ROV.
```

/>
<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14597/EnergyAirforce_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14597/EnergyAirforce_After.webp").default}
/>

The Sims - Bustin Out:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/SimsBustinOut_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/SimsBustinOut_After.webp").default}
/>

The Sims 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/Sims2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/Sims2_After.webp").default}
/>

FIFA 2009:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/FIFA2009_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/FIFA2009_After.webp").default}
/>

Persona 4:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14597/Persona4_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14597/Persona4_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14301,14567,14595,14550">
  ### GS/HW: Framebuffer switching optimizations
</PCSX2PRLink>

Avoiding framebuffer switching has been further optimized. This allows us to reuse the old framebuffer attachments which provides a FPS boost.

> To make it a bit more simpler the less re binding/re attachments are done the better it is however great care is needed because if done improperly it can cause issues.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To make it a bit simpler, the less re-binding/re-attachments are done the better. However, great care is needed because if done improperly it can cause issues.
```

The FPS increase wasn't that significant to show benchmark comparisons since the decrease wasn't that significant, mostly in the single digits.

> What did get more decrease was the reductions of bindings when using ROV on Direct3D11, however since there's a bottleneck elsewhere (ROV barriers themselves) we didn't see much of a FPS gain there as well.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
What did decrease more was the reduction of bindings when using ROV on Direct3D11, however since there's a bottleneck elsewhere (ROV barriers themselves) we didn't see much of an FPS gain there as well.
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14603">
  ### GS/Direct3D11: Backport ds as rt from GL for depth feedback.
</PCSX2PRLink>

> With the adition of depth feedback for Accurate alpha testing/AA1 Direct3D11 became paifully slow when using said features. This is because GPU depth copies are much much slower on Direct3D11 compared to color copies. A solution was treat the depth as color which would require an additional shader copies, and later on where we'd need a copy as a barrier we'd do a color copy where we'd usually do depth copy resulting in doubling the speed or more, even tho technically we do even more copies with the addition of shader copies. This brings the speed closer to OpenGL without using ROV when using AAT/AA1.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With the addition of depth feedback for Accurate Alpha Test/AA1 Direct3D11 became painfully slow when using said features. This is because GPU depth copies are much much slower on Direct3D11 compared to color copies. A solution was treat the depth as color which would require an additional shader copies, and later on where we'd need a copy as a barrier we'd do a color copy where we'd usually do depth copy resulting in doubling the speed or more, even though technically we do even more copies with the addition of shader copies. This brings the speed closer to OpenGL without using ROV when using AAT/AA1.
```

---
draft: false
title: PCSX2 2.8.0 is now out!
tags:
  - devblog
date: 2026-08-20
description: PCSX2 2.8 Release Post
hide_table_of_contents: false
titleImage: /img/2-0-banner.webp
image: /img/2-0-banner.webp
authors:
  - kamfretoz
  - lightningterror
  - airgamer
  - pandubz
  - jordan
  - link
  - stern
  - govanify
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import { BsWindows, BsApple, BsLightningChargeFill } from "react-icons/bs";
import { FaLinux } from "react-icons/fa";
import { FaComputer, FaScaleBalanced } from "react-icons/fa6";
import { GiTurtleShell } from "react-icons/gi";

Nearly six months after the release of PCSX2 2.6.0 and two years after the big release of 2.0.0, we are excited to unveil PCSX2 2.8.0! We're even more excited to showcase the things that we have been working on.

To start with a teaser, we have some serious performance gains to talk about with this release, seen here with Need for Speed: Carbon!
picture:

<Image src={require("./img/benches/main.webp").default} />

> Now lets jump in to this release's major talking points!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's jump into this release's major talking points!
```

Video Encoders:

- Hardware Encoders:
  - AMD AMF (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Intel QSV (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Nvidia NVENC (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Media Foundations (H264, H265, AV1)
  - Vulkan Video (H264, H265, AV1)

- Software Encoders:
  - [libx264 (H264)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/encoders/x264)
  - [libsvtav1 (AV1)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/video/AV1)
  - [ffv1 (FFmpeg's own codec)](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/Encode/FFV1)
  - [qtrle (Apple QT RLE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QuickTime_Animation)

Audio Encoders:

- [AAC (Advanced Audio Coding)](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/AAC)
- [Opus](https://codecs.wiki/docs/audio/Opus)
- [FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec)](https://xiph.org/flac/)
- [`pcm_s16le` & `pcm_s16be` (WAV)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WAV)

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="13974">
  ### USB: Implement EyeToy camera support on macOS
</PCSX2PRLink>

SternXD worked on adding EyeToy camera support for macOS. With this, all 3 OSes now have full EyeToy camera support!

<PCSX2PRLink authors="Florin9doi" prNums="13652,14328">
  ### USB: Train Mascon, Master Controller and Olympus Storage Devices support
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Florin9doi had worked on adding additional Train Mascon and Master Controller support to the existing Train controller feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Florin9doi has worked on adding additional Train Mascon and Master Controller support to the existing Train controller feature.
```

</PCSX2PRLink>

The game shortcut creator now allows you to attach a custom icon to a shortcut as well when you're creating one. No more having to manually add them afterwards!

:::info
Unlike other operating systems, Windows only allows icon files `(*.ico)` for shortcut icons.
:::

<Image src={require("./img/Shortcut_Icon.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14308">
  ### Qt: Revamp the status bar
</PCSX2PRLink>

The status bar has received quite a number of quality of life improvements. You can now control the volume of the emulated virtual console directly from the main interface without going through the audio settings manually every time you want to adjust the volume. You can also now toggle the speed limit directly without using the hotkeys. Additionally, it shows you the host GPU usage, the renderer that the automatic renderer selection picked, and the currently active internal resolution multiplier.

<Image src={require("./img/Status_Bar.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="kamfretoz" prNums="14190,14191">
  ### Qt: Add a bunch of `Open XXX Folder` for Game List Entries
</PCSX2PRLink>

> A few new options has been added to the Game List's context menu that allows you to open the folders of various PCSX2 related data or resources right from within the applications itself! You can access it by right clicking a game entry on the Qt Game List.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few new options have been added to the Game List's context menu that allow you to open the folders of various PCSX2-related data or resources right from within the application itself! You can access this by right-clicking a game entry on the Qt Game List.
```

Until now, these options have all been only for the main color texture, but the GS also has mismatches with PC hardware in its handling of the depth texture. In particular, the alpha test, which allows discarding pixels when the texture alpha value is below a set cutoff, gives games the choice of whether to discard color, depth, or both. On the other hand, the only option for PC GPUs is to discard both[^Early_Fragment_Test].

For games that choose the option to discard only color, PCSX2 can use the shader blend system to load the existing color from the render target and re-output that, but for depth, PCSX2 didn't support a fully accurate system. Instead, PCSX2 rendered every draw call twice. First, it would draw color only, without discarding based on the alpha test, then a second pass would draw depth only, discarding where needed. This means that if two overlapping triangles occurred in the same draw, it was possible for the wrong result to happen, since the pass that was drawing color didn't update depth and therefore wouldn't reject a further triangle drawn after a closer triangle.

> To fix this, TJ added a system similar to the color handling for depth, where we disable the dedicated hardware and instead do all processing in the shader. This means disabling the hardware depth test and emulating that as well, so that it doesn't interfere with our attempts to cancel depth update by re-emitting the existing depth value. Unfortunately, due to this being a niche usage of an already niche feataure, many of the APIs that did support this kind of shader feedback loop for color failed when we attempted to do the same with depth textures, handing our shaders outdated pixel values. In the end, only Vulkan, which has an extension made explicitly for this purpose, consistently worked, while the D3D12 and OpenGL renderers default to copying the depth texture to a temporary color texture for the handling, then copying the result back to the original depth texture when done.[^DX11_Depth_Issue] [^FbFetch_Unsupported_GPU] [^Metal_FbFetch]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix this, TJ added a system similar to the color handling for depth, where we disable the dedicated hardware and instead do all processing in the shader. This means disabling the hardware depth test and emulating that as well, so that it doesn't interfere with our attempts to cancel depth update by re-emitting the existing depth value. Unfortunately, due to this being a niche usage of an already niche feature, many of the APIs that did support this kind of shader feedback loop for color failed when we attempted to do the same with depth textures, handing our shaders outdated pixel values. In the end, only Vulkan, which has an extension made explicitly for this purpose, consistently worked, while the D3D12 and OpenGL renderers default to copying the depth texture to a temporary color texture for the handling, then copying the result back to the original depth texture when done.[^DX11_Depth_Issue] [^FbFetch_Unsupported_GPU] [^Metal_FbFetch]
```

Minna No Tennis:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/MNT_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/MNT_After.webp").default}
/>

Ratchet & Clank: Up Your Arsenal

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse_Before.webp")
      .default
  }
  after={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse_After.webp").default
  }
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse2_Before.webp")
      .default
  }
  after={
    require("./img/comparisons/DepthFeedback/R&C-UpYourArse2_After.webp")
      .default
  }
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13681,14439">
  ### GS/HW: Support for HW AA1 lines/triangles
</PCSX2PRLink>

> AA1 is the PS2's name for antialiasing. Unlike MSAA, which rasterizes triangles at a higher resolution and then downsamples, the PS2's AA1 works by adding a semi-transparent border around each triangle as it's drawn. In order for the semi-transparent border to not block the triangles below, it doesn't write depth, even if the fully-opaque parts of the triangle do. Even so, that only prevents things from looking broken under AA1. For fully working antialiasing, PS2 games have to sort their triangles and draw back to front, like in the old depth-buffer-less days of the PS1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AA1 is the PS2's name for antialiasing. Unlike MSAA, which rasterizes triangles at a higher resolution and then downsamples, the PS2's AA1 works by adding a semi-transparent border around each triangle as it's drawn. In order for the semi-transparent border to not block the triangles below, it doesn't write depth, even though the fully-opaque parts of the triangle do. Even so, that only prevents things from looking broken under AA1. For fully working antialiasing, PS2 games have to sort their triangles and draw back to front, like in the old depth-buffer-less days of the PS1.
```

> Because PC GPUs don't support writing depth for only some triangles in a draw, this was a software-renderer-only feature in PCSX2 for a long time, but TJ used PCSX2's newly-added software depth support to add support for these triangle borders. Due to the high cost of the software depth emulation, this is currently disabled by default, but can be enabled in the graphics settings which will allow it to activate on supported games.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because PC GPUs don't support writing depth for only some triangles in a draw, this was a software-renderer-only feature in PCSX2 for a long time, but TJ used PCSX2's newly-added software depth support to add support for these triangle borders. Due to the high cost of the software depth emulation, this is currently disabled by default, but it can be enabled in the graphics settings, which will allow it to activate on supported games.
```

God Of War:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/GoW_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/GoW_After.webp").default}
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/GoWBridge_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/GoWBridge_After.webp").default}
/>

Final Fantasy X:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/FFX_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/FFX_After.webp").default}
/>

The Incredibles:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/Incredibles_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/Incredibles_After.webp").default}
/>

Sly 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/Sly2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/Sly2_After.webp").default}
/>

Jonny Moseley Mad Trix:

<SliderCompare
  before={
    require("./img/comparisons/AA1/JonnyMoseleydebug_Before.webp").default
  }
  after={require("./img/comparisons/AA1/JonnyMoseleydebug_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="14503,14555,14643,14646">
  ### GS/HW: Support for Rasterizer Order View (ROV)
</PCSX2PRLink>

> ROV (Rasterizer Ordered Views) provide a way to do programmable color blending when games draw overlapping geometry. They help gurantee that pixels are blended is the same order that the game intended, which is necessary for accurate graphics emulation. PS2 games often use effects where pixels must be blended in exactly the order the games draws them in (e.g. layering textures, transparency, etc.). GPUs already provide this ordering guarantee for fixed function blending. However, many blending effects in PS2 games cannot be accurately be done with fixed function, so we emulate them in the pixel shader. To enforce correct ordering in pixel shaders there are several approaches that we use: barrier loops (DX12, VK, GL, Metal), framebuffer fetch (aka FB Fetch; GL, VK, Metal), copy loops (DX11, GL), and most recently rasterizer ordered views (aka ROV; DX12, DX11, VK). Out of these the fastest is FB fetch, though it has the most limited support out of the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROV (Rasterizer Ordered Views) provides a way to do programmable color blending when games draw overlapping geometry. They help guarantee that pixels are blended in the same order that the game intended, which is necessary for accurate graphics emulation. PS2 games often use effects where pixels must be blended in exactly the order the game draws them in (e.g. layering textures, transparency, etc.). GPUs already provide this ordering guarantee for fixed function blending. However, many blending effects in PS2 games cannot be accurately done with fixed function, so we emulate them in the pixel shader. To enforce correct ordering in pixel shaders there are several approaches that we use: barrier loops (DX12, VK, GL, Metal), framebuffer fetch (aka FB Fetch; GL, VK, Metal), copy loops (DX11, GL), and most recently rasterizer ordered views (aka ROV; DX12, DX11, VK). Out of these the fastest is FB fetch, though it has the most limited support out of the list.
```

> In the middle are ROV and barrier loops, which both have widespeard support. In some cases ROV can be faster, while in other barriers can be. The tradeoff is generally system and game dependent, though ROV tends to work well in cases where the number of barrier would be excessively high (e.g. with AA1 enabled). The slowest is copy loops, but it's basic and has universal support. It took a few months to implement and test because our current GS code was based around the other methods. It's also not an all-or-nothing approach since ROVs can be turned on/off within a single frame. We had to determine a heuristic for when to activate ROVs, since using them unnecessarily or switching too often can degrade performance. During the process we encountered some bugs with VK ROVs that took some time to sort out. The PR went through several revisions to find an approach that was both performant and maintainable from a coding perspective. Many people were involved in debugging, testing, and reviewing it to get it to it's current state. Likely there will continue to be some adjustments as users encounter issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the middle are ROV and barrier loops, which both have widespread support. In some cases ROV can be faster, while in others barriers can be. The tradeoff is generally system and game dependent, though ROV tends to work well in cases where the number of barriers would be excessively high (e.g. with AA1 enabled). The slowest is copy loops, but it's basic and has universal support. It took a few months to implement and test because our current GS code was based around the other methods. It's also not an all-or-nothing approach since ROVs can be turned on/off within a single frame. We had to determine a heuristic for when to activate ROVs, since using them unnecessarily or switching too often can degrade performance. During the process we encountered some bugs with VK ROVs that took some time to sort out. The PR went through several revisions to find an approach that was both performant and maintainable from a coding perspective. Many people were involved in debugging, testing, and reviewing it to get it to its current state. Likely there will continue to be some adjustments as users encounter issues.
```

> Simply put, this allows higher blending accuracy levels to incur less performance hits!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply put, this allows higher blending accuracy levels to incur less of a performance hit!
```

Here are some benchmarks:

<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_AceCombat.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_AceCombatZero.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_Black.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_Driv3r.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_GT4.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_HarryPotter.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_MC3.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_NFSCarbon.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_NFSUnderground.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/ROV/ROV_Primal.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TheLastRar" prNums="13792">
  ### GS/DX12: Use Enhanced Barriers API
</PCSX2PRLink>

When DX12 launched, texture layout transitions (Switching from a render layout to a read layout), texture access (does the GPU need to flush caches?), and GPU synchronization (waiting until we've done rendering) was done by simply specifying the resource state with resource barriers.

> This simplification, however, complicated feedback reads, requiring us to use aliased resources (two resources sharing the same memory) and relatively expensive aliasing barriers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When DX12 launched, texture layout transitions (switching from a render layout to a read layout), texture access (does the GPU need to flush caches?), and GPU synchronization (waiting until we've done rendering) were done by simply specifying the resource state with resource barriers.
This simplification, however, complicated feedback reads, requiring us to use aliased resources (two resources sharing the same memory) and relatively expensive aliasing barriers.
```

DX12 has since released "Enhanced Barriers" which replaces the old resource state/barriers and allows greater control over texture layouts, texture access and GPU synchronization.

> This greater control allows us do do away with aliased resources, and instead directly specify layout, access and synchronization we need for feedback reads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DX12 has since released "Enhanced Barriers" which replace the old resource state/barriers and allow greater control over texture layouts, texture access, and GPU synchronization.
This greater control allows us to do away with aliased resources, and instead directly specify the layout, access, and synchronization we need for feedback reads.
```

In addition to simplifying feedback reads, the extra information we provide allows GPUs to more efficiently handle barriers, allowing better utilisation of the hardware.

> Not every GPU benefits from Enhanced Barriers, RDNA2 and older AMD GPUs see minimal benefit, but newer GPUs see substantial improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not every GPU benefits from Enhanced Barriers; RDNA2 and older AMD GPUs see minimal benefit, but newer GPUs see substantial improvements.
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TheLastRar" prNums="14188">
  ### GS/HW: Add SW (Shader Based) Anisotropic Filtering
</PCSX2PRLink>

Anisotropic Filtering is a technique that improves the visuals of textures drawn at an oblique angle[^Oblique_Angle]. The effect is most noticeable on cobblestone or tile floor textures at native resolution.

> While the PS2 never supported this features, PC GPU have had hardware support for this for eons and PCSX2 offered it to improve visual quality of games.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anisotropic Filtering is a technique that improves the visuals of textures drawn at an oblique angle[^Oblique_Angle]. The effect is most noticeable on cobblestone or tile floor textures at native resolution.
While the PS2 never supported this feature, PC GPUs have had hardware support for this for eons and PCSX2 offered it to improve visual quality of games.
```

Unfortunately, we encountered a few issues with hardware level Anisotropic Filtering on certain GPU models:

- AMD drivers would ignore our attempts to enable Anisotropic Filtering.

>   LightningTerror had determined that providing a dummy mipmap layer had success on older GPUs, however, the workaround had only limited success on newer generations of AMD GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- AMD drivers would ignore our attempts to enable Anisotropic Filtering.
  LightningTerror determined that providing a dummy mipmap layer had success on older GPUs; however, the workaround had only limited success on newer generations of AMD GPUs.
```

- DX12 did not allow Anisotropic Filtering and point filtering on the same texture.
  Point filtering is often used by games wanting a more pixel art style, instead of the smoothed sampling of other filtering methods.
  Due to limitations with the DX12 API, we had opted to ignore point filtering in favour of enabling Anisotropic Filtering.

>   Unfortunately, this caused artifacts in Dragon Quest V where, without point filtering, some textures would have black pixels appear in them that were bleeding over from outside the texture's clamped area(See [this issue](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/14077)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DX12 did not allow Anisotropic Filtering and point filtering on the same texture.
  Point filtering is often used by games wanting a more pixel art style, instead of the smoothed sampling of other filtering methods.
  Due to limitations with the DX12 API, we had opted to ignore point filtering in favour of enabling Anisotropic Filtering.
  Unfortunately, this caused artifacts in Dragon Quest V where, without point filtering, some textures would have black pixels appear in them that were bleeding over from outside the texture's clamped area (see [this issue](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/14077)).
```

Anisotropic Filtering in high level shaders is noticeably more demanding than using the GPU's native anisotropic filtering. Older GPUs may notice a mild to moderate performance degradation, and users are encouraged to re-check their anisotropic filtering setting to ensure it is not too high for their system to tolerate.

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13943">
  ### GS/HW: Merge together adjacent tristrips in drawlist.
</PCSX2PRLink>

This fixes a bug in tristrip detection that prevented triangle strips with 2 triangles from being detected. This brings a massive performance gain on some games.

<Image src={require("./img/benches/MergeTristriplist/GTA_SA.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="14140">
  ### GS: Fixes to CRTC merging
</PCSX2PRLink>

> One of the features of the PS2 are the "CRTC" merge circuits, which allow for some limited post-processing and compositing of images before it is output to the screen. Some of the functionalities of these circuits, such as alpha blending two images together, are usually done with the strandard rendering capabilities of the PS2. However, certain games make use of the CRTC merge cirtuits for things such as overlaying a loading screen on top of the render space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the features of the PS2 is the "CRTC" merge circuits, which allow for some limited post-processing and compositing of images before they are output to the screen. Some of the functionalities of these circuits, such as alpha blending two images together, are usually done with the standard rendering capabilities of the PS2. However, certain games make use of the CRTC merge circuits for things such as overlaying a loading screen on top of the render space.
```

> Since this feature is not used frequently, there have been a couple unresolved bugs. One such bug was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the the game apparently left the CRTC merging funtionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this feature is not used frequently, there have been a couple of unresolved bugs. One such bug was fixed in [#13300](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/13300), where the game apparently left the CRTC merging functionality enabled with invalid settings. On the PS2 the settings would not have caused problems, as the alpha blending ended up erasing any possible side effects, so this had to be properly handled on the PCSX2 side. Another bug was fixed in [#14140](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/14140), where the game used CRTC merging to overlay a loading bar. PCSX2 wasn't updating the GS registers in the correct order, which caused the wrong image to be used for the loading bar.
```

This is Football 2003:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/CRTCMerging/TiF_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/CRTCMerging/TiF_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13875">
  ### GS/Texture Cache: Improve depth target lookup behaviour
</PCSX2PRLink>

> In games such as Pachi Para we were picking the wrong target from the available list which resulted in a whole bunch of issues. This aims to correct the behaviour when the target expects to pickup a depth target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In games such as Pachi Para we were picking the wrong target from the available list, which resulted in a whole bunch of issues. This aims to correct the behaviour when the target expects to pick up a depth target.
```

PachiPara 13:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13875/PachiPara13_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13875/PachiPara13_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14843">
  ### GS/HW: Fix some target detection and format issues.
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Fixes problems with target overlap of a single pixel and looking in to the future to get the correct frame format on shuffles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fixes problems with target overlap of a single pixel and looking into the future to get the correct frame format on shuffles.
```

Single pixel overlap was happening on Steambot as it was drawing right on the edge of the target, then blending in the Z buffer, which is of course not good.

Also fixed an issue where when there is a texture shuffle it checks if the target is used in the next draw as a texture, but didn't consider if it was also a shuffle of a different type, so that is now corrected.

SteamBot Chronicles:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot_After.webp").default}
/>

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14843/Steambot2_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13841">
  ### GS/HW: Adjust depth copies when doing Texture Cache moves
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Previously depth textures being moved in the texture cache would be done via GPU copy operations. Instead, shader copy/blit operations are used instead. This ensures accuracy matches OpenGL and Vulkan, but avoids issues with Direct3D11 which does not support partial copies, and Direct3D12 having inconsistent driver level support from GPU vendors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously depth textures being moved in the texture cache would be done via GPU copy operations. Instead, shader copy/blit operations are now used. This ensures accuracy matches OpenGL and Vulkan, but avoids issues with Direct3D 11 which does not support partial copies, and Direct3D 12 having inconsistent driver-level support from GPU vendors.
```

Kenran Butousai:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13841/KenranBoutosai_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13841/KenranBoutosai_After.webp").default}
/>

Kunoichi:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13841/Kunoichi_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13841/Kunoichi_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13869">
  ### GS/Direct3D12: Don't end render passes on enhanced barriers
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Following the addition of Enhanced Barriers it was discovered that we can cut down the number of render passes (attachment state changes), in some scenarios this provided further a nice boost when using enhanced barriers on D3D12.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the addition of Enhanced Barriers, it was discovered that we can cut down the number of render passes (attachment state changes). In some scenarios this provided a nice further boost when using enhanced barriers on D3D12.
```

<Image src={require("./img/benches/13869/NFS_MW.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/13869/RC3.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/13869/WRC4.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14059,14073,14597">
  ### GS/HW: Improve destination alpha testing handling
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Previously it was believed that resolving these issues would require ROV, however LightningTerror discovered that handling can be improved without needing ROV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously it was believed that resolving these issues would require ROV; however, LightningTerror discovered that handling can be improved without needing ROV.
```

  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/SimsBustinOut_After.webp").default}
/>

The Sims 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/Sims2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/Sims2_After.webp").default}
/>

FIFA 2009:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14059/FIFA2009_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14059/FIFA2009_After.webp").default}
/>

Persona 4:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14597/Persona4_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14597/Persona4_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14301,14567,14595,14550">
  ### GS/HW: Framebuffer switching optimizations
</PCSX2PRLink>

Avoiding framebuffer switching has been further optimized. This allows us to reuse the old framebuffer attachments which provides a FPS boost.

To make it a bit simpler, the less re-binding/re-attachments are done the better. However, great care is needed because if done improperly it can cause issues.

This change did not change performance noticeably beyond single digit changes.

> What did decrease more was the reduction of bindings when using ROV on Direct3D11, however since there's a bottleneck elsewhere (ROV barriers themselves) we didn't see much of an FPS gain there as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What did decrease more was the reduction of bindings when using ROV on Direct3D 11; however, since there's a bottleneck elsewhere (ROV barriers themselves) we didn't see much of an FPS gain there either.
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="13948,13917,14243">
  ### GS/HW: Further improve framebuffer copies.
</PCSX2PRLink>

Further optimizations have been done to improve framebuffer copies which will be useful for all renderers when texture barriers are disabled or not supported.

> This is especially helpful for Direct3D11 since we have no texture barrier support, other than ROV which can be faster for a lot of draw splits using full barriers but not single barriers/copies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is especially helpful for Direct3D 11 since we have no texture barrier support, other than ROV which can be faster for a lot of draw splits using full barriers but not single barriers/copies.
```

- Align drawlist bounding box to 4 pixel boundaries.
  Will be faster using Direct Memory Access, otherwise it may stall as more commands need to be issued.

>   This will make the bounding box slightly larger but more friendly with gpu cache/vram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Align drawlist bounding box to 4-pixel boundaries.
  Will be faster using Direct Memory Access, otherwise it may stall as more commands need to be issued.
  This will make the bounding box slightly larger but more friendly with GPU cache/vram.
```

> - Expand 4 pixel boundaries correction to non overlapping draws.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Expand 4-pixel boundaries correction to non-overlapping draws.
```

- If the copy area covers 95% or more of the render target size switch to full copies using CopyResource instead of CopySubresourceRegion.
- At this size using full copies should be faster.

Currently it is only used when texture barriers are disabled but can be used when Depth testing/Afail copies are implemented.

> Next multidraw framebuffer copies has been backported from Direct3D11 to OpenGL in cases were texture barriers aren't supported which may help some older drivers which lack support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, multidraw framebuffer copies have been backported from Direct3D 11 to OpenGL in cases where texture barriers aren't supported, which may help some older drivers which lack support.
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14034">
  ### GS/HW: Enable non recursive sw blending on minimum level.
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Since non recursive blending is basically free which doesn't require a barrier/copy we can just enable it on minimum level without any cost for better accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since non-recursive blending is basically free and doesn't require a barrier/copy, we can just enable it on minimum level without any cost for better accuracy.
```

Sniper Elite:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SniperElite_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SniperElite_After.webp").default}
/>

Star Wars Battlefront 2:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SWBF2_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/14034/SWBF2_After.webp").default}
/>

<PCSX2PRLink authors="lightningterror" prNums="14603">
  ### GS/Direct3D11: Backport ds as rt from GL for depth feedback.
</PCSX2PRLink>

> With the addition of depth feedback for Accurate Alpha Test/AA1, Direct3D11 became painfully slow when using said features. This is because GPU depth copies are much much slower on Direct3D11 compared to color copies. A solution was treat the depth as color which would require additional shader copies, and later on where we'd need a copy as a barrier we'd do a color copy where we'd usually do depth copy resulting in doubling the speed or more, even though technically we do even more copies with the addition of shader copies. This brings the speed closer to OpenGL without using ROV when using AAT/AA1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the addition of depth feedback for Accurate Alpha Test/AA1, Direct3D 11 became painfully slow when using said features. This is because GPU depth copies are much, much slower on Direct3D 11 compared to color copies. A solution was to treat the depth as color, which would require additional shader copies, and later on, where we'd need a copy as a barrier, we'd do a color copy where we'd usually do a depth copy, resulting in doubling the speed or more, even though technically we do even more copies with the addition of shader copies. This brings the speed closer to OpenGL without using ROV when using AAT/AA1.
```

<Image src={require("./img/benches/14603/FFX.webp").default} />
<Image src={require("./img/benches/14603/BCV.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13794">
  ### GS/HW: Improve channel shuffle detection and use on 24bit sources
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Improves lookup of sources when 24 bit targets are involved. Also merges single page targets in to larget targets if they overlap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improves lookup of sources when 24-bit targets are involved. Also merges single page targets into larger targets if they overlap.
```

> Channel shuffles specifically, always just requested entire targets to have valid information when looking up the source, however in some cases like with MotoGP, the source of the shuffle is a 24bit target, so there is no valid alpha, so the lookup was failing, causing the shuffle to completely fall over. This corrects that by pre-checking what channels the shuffle requires for the read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Channel shuffles specifically always just requested entire targets to have valid information when looking up the source, however in some cases like with MotoGP, the source of the shuffle is a 24-bit target, so there is no valid alpha, so the lookup was failing, causing the shuffle to completely fall over. This corrects that by pre-checking what channels the shuffle requires for the read.
```

L.A. Rush:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13794/LARush_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13794/LARush_After.webp").default}
/>

MotoGP:

<SliderCompare
  before={require("./img/comparisons/13794/MotoGP_Before.webp").default}
  after={require("./img/comparisons/13794/MotoGP_After.webp").default}
/>

> <PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="14455">

Reviewer 7: Should also add me and TJ since it was joint pr.

Author: Done

  ### GS/HW: Improve texture hazard handling, shuffles + fix CSBW typo
</PCSX2PRLink>

Reduce hazard copies where they are not required and fix a typo in the SW renderer drop back.

> Hazard checks were only checking if the texture and target were pointing to the same place, they didn't actually check if it was reading and writing from the same place, if they aren't then there's no need to create a hazard copy as the data won't change, this will cut down a bunch of copies (as seen below). Also fixed a typo in the rect calculation for readbacks in the Software renderer dropback (CSBW), whoops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hazard checks were only checking if the texture and target were pointing to the same place; they didn't actually check if it was reading and writing from the same place. If they aren't, then there's no need to create a hazard copy as the data won't change; this will cut down a bunch of copies (as seen below). Also fixed a typo in the rect calculation for readbacks in the Software renderer dropback (CSBW), whoops.
```

- 139  Steambot_Chronicles_SLUS-21344_20230511114115
- 138  hitmancontracts_l3_bjarkov
- 138  LEGO Racers 2_SLUS-20042
- 137  hitman (this is Blood Money)
- 130  Jak X - Combat Racing_SCUS-97429_20250526073932
- 127  LEGO Dome Racers_SLES-51303_20230717193026
- 114  Juiced_SLUS-20872_20230505163642
- 69   007 russia half screen
- 67   Minority_Report_-_Everybody_Runs_SLUS-20331_20221022205359
- 66   007 - From Russia with Love_SLUS-21282_20231202212313
- 66   Syphon_Filter_-_Logans_Shadow_SCUS-97584_20240104192224
- 45   FordRacing2CarShadow
- 40   Charlie and the Chocolate Factory_SLES-53386_20250214214241
- 38   Power_Drome_SLUS-20978_20240617182239
- 32   Knight Rider - The Game_SLES-51011_20230301100135
- 28   The_Godfather_SLUS-21385_20240206091914
- 26   The Bigs 2_SLUS-21860_20250303214104
- 25   Need for Speed - Undercover_SLUS-21801_20240712020737
- 24   Indiana_Jones_and_the_Emperors_Tomb_SLUS-20508_20230206223913
- 24   Killzone_SCES-52004_20240617170050
- 24   Prince of Persia - Sands of Time_SLUS-20743_20250528185119
```

<PCSX2PRLink authors="refractionpcsx2" prNums="13844">
  ### GS/HW: Improve fog accuracy in HW Renderers
</PCSX2PRLink>

> Improves the fog modulation in the hardware renderers to match the playstation 2. This doesn't account for interpolation where the colour changes across the primitive, that will still be slightly out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improves the fog modulation in the hardware renderers to match the PlayStation 2. This doesn't account for interpolation where the colour changes across the primitive, that will still be slightly out.
```

hide_table_of_contents: false
titleImage: /img/2-0-banner.webp
image: /img/2-0-banner.webp
authors:
  - kamfretoz
  - lightningterror
  - airgamer
  - pandubz
  - jordan
  - link
  - SternXD
  - govanify
---

Nearly six months after the release of PCSX2 2.6.0, we are excited to unveil PCSX2 2.8.0! We're even more excited to showcase the things that we have been working on.

due to all the improvements and a modernisation the system requrement have changed

<a href="https://www.w3schools.com/">system requirements page </a> but in short
pcsx2 requires Four physical cores[^P-cores] with SMT and atleast a nvidia GTX
750 Ti

// will need help to corectly link it

<!--truncate-->

<PCSX2PRLink authors="SternXD" prNums="14127">
  ### Qt/FullscreenUI/ImGui: OSD Dedicated tab, custom fonts, margins, and
  Select/Deselect All
</PCSX2PRLink>

This allows the ability to change the On Screen Display font , also gives the On Screen Display is own dedicated settings with PCSX2

<Image src={require("./img/OSD.webp").default} />

<Image src={require("./img/OSD_Settings.webp").default} />

<PCSX2PRLink authors="TJnotJT" prNums="13681">
  ### GS/HW: Support for HW AA1 lines/triangles
</PCSX2PRLink>

> AA1 is the PS2's name for antialiasing, which works by adding partially transparent pixels to the edges of lines and triangles to give a softer edge. It has been implemented in PCSX2 software renderer for a while. This changes just adds it to the hardware renderer. Implemented by using the vertex shader to generate new polygons for the edge pixels of lines/triangles. Emulating AA1 triangles can have a high overhead because they may require special depth handling. Specifically, the edges of AA1 triangles do not write to the depth buffer, since that would cause artifacts.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
AA1 is the PS2's name for antialiasing.  Unlike MSAA, which rasterizes triangles at a higher resolution and then downsamples, the PS2's AA1 works by adding a semi-transparent border around each triangle as it's drawn.  In order for the semi-transparent border to not block the triangles below, it doesn't write depth, even if the fully-opaque parts of the triangle do.  Even so, that only prevents things from looking broken under AA1.  For fully working antialiasing, PS2 games have to sort their triangles and draw back to front, like in the old depth-buffer-less days of the PS1.

Because PC GPUs don't support writing depth for only some triangles in a draw, this was a software-renderer-only feature in PCSX2 for a long time, but TJ used PCSX2's newly-added software depth support to add support for these triangle borders.  Due to the high cost of the software depth emulation, this is currently disabled by default, but can be enabled in the graphics settings which will allow it to activate on supported games.
```
BTW we should have an entry here for 13631 since that's what allows this to work.

Also should we put in some screenshots of games that are improved by it, e.g. the GoW bridge?

Author: > BTW we should have an entry here for 13631 since that's what allows this to work.

13631 has been added 

> Also should we put in some screenshots of games that are improved by it, e.g. the GoW bridge?

Good idea
